Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
body fluid compartments and composition. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin with body fluids. Describe the body fluid compartments and their sizes.
Water is the major constituent of the body,
making up about sixty per cent of body weight in a typical adult male,
rather less in females and the obese because fat is low in water,
and more in the neonate. This total body water is divided into two main
compartments.
The intracellular fluid, within the cells, is the larger,
about two-thirds of the total — some forty per cent of body weight.
The extracellular fluid, outside the cells,
is about one-third — some twenty per cent of body weight — and is itself
subdivided: the interstitial fluid, bathing the cells, makes up most of it,
while the plasma, the fluid of the blood,
is about a quarter of the extracellular fluid, around five per cent of body weight;
a small transcellular fraction includes cerebrospinal,
synovial and other specialised fluids.
As a rule of thumb, the sixty-forty-twenty rule.
So total body water is about sixty per cent of body weight,
two-thirds intracellular and one-third extracellular,
the extracellular being mostly interstitial fluid with a smaller plasma volume —
the sixty-forty-twenty distribution underlying fluid physiology and therapy.
How are the volumes of these compartments measured?
The compartment volumes are measured by the indicator-dilution principle,
which rests on a simple physical relationship:
if a known amount of a marker substance is introduced and allowed to distribute
evenly throughout a compartment, then the volume of that compartment equals the
amount of marker given, corrected for any lost,
divided by its concentration once equilibrated — volume equals quantity divided by
concentration.
The compartment measured depends on choosing a marker confined to it.
Total body water is measured with a marker that distributes through all the water,
such as deuterium-labelled or tritiated water.
The extracellular fluid is measured with a marker confined outside the cells,
such as inulin or a similar substance. The plasma volume is measured with a marker
confined to the plasma, such as labelled albumin or a dye that binds it.
The intracellular fluid and interstitial volumes cannot be measured directly but
are derived by subtraction.
So compartment volumes are measured by indicator dilution — volume equals the
quantity of marker divided by its equilibrated concentration — using markers
confined to each compartment, with the intracellular and interstitial volumes
obtained by subtraction.
Describe and explain the differences in ionic composition between the intracellular
and extracellular fluids.
The intracellular and extracellular fluids differ strikingly in their ionic
make-up, and the difference is actively maintained and physiologically essential.
The extracellular fluid — plasma and interstitial fluid — has sodium as its
dominant cation and chloride and bicarbonate as its main anions;
it resembles a dilute salt solution.
The intracellular fluid, by contrast, has potassium as its dominant cation,
with magnesium, and its main anions are organic phosphates and proteins;
its sodium and chloride are low and its free calcium extremely low.
These differences are created and maintained chiefly by the sodium-potassium pump,
which extrudes sodium and accumulates potassium against their gradients,
at constant energy cost, opposed by the cells' permeability.
The plasma differs from the interstitial fluid mainly in its higher protein
content, the capillary wall being relatively impermeable to protein.
So the extracellular fluid is sodium- and chloride-rich while the intracellular
fluid is potassium- and organic-phosphate-rich with very low calcium,
differences actively maintained by the sodium-potassium pump — the gradients
underlying excitability, transport and calcium signalling,
and plasma differing from interstitial fluid chiefly in its protein.
How is the osmolality of the body fluids regulated?
The osmolality of the body fluids — normally close to two hundred and ninety
milliosmoles per kilogram — is regulated within narrow limits,
principally by controlling water balance,
because osmolality is essentially the ratio of solute to water.
The control is centred on the hypothalamus.
Osmoreceptors there detect changes in osmolality: a rise, as with water loss,
stimulates two responses.
First, it triggers the release of antidiuretic hormone from the posterior
pituitary, which acts on the renal collecting ducts to increase water reabsorption,
concentrating the urine and conserving water.
Second, it stimulates thirst, prompting water intake.
Together these restore the osmolality by adjusting water.
A fall in osmolality suppresses both, producing a dilute diuresis.
This system regulates water and so osmolality,
whereas sodium content and so extracellular volume are regulated separately,
mainly by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and the natriuretic peptides.
So osmolality is regulated by the hypothalamic osmoreceptors controlling water
balance — through antidiuretic hormone, which adjusts renal water reabsorption,
and through thirst — keeping osmolality near two hundred and ninety milliosmoles
per kilogram, a system distinct from the regulation of sodium and extracellular
volume.
What determines the movement of water between the compartments?
Water moves between compartments by osmosis,
driven by differences in effective osmotic pressure,
and since water crosses cell membranes freely,
the osmolality of the compartments is normally equal at equilibrium.
The key determinant of how water distributes is the distribution of the solutes
that cannot cross the relevant membrane.
Across the cell membrane, sodium is effectively excluded from the cell by the pump,
so it behaves as an extracellular solute,
and the amount of sodium and its accompanying anions in the extracellular fluid
determines how much water stays there;
a change in extracellular osmolality shifts water between cells and the
extracellular fluid until osmolality re-equilibrates.
Across the capillary wall, which is permeable to small ions but not to protein,
it is the plasma proteins that exert the effective osmotic, or oncotic,
pressure holding water in the plasma.
So water moves by osmosis to equalise osmolality,
its distribution governed by the impermeant solutes:
sodium across the cell membrane determines the intracellular-extracellular split,
and plasma protein across the capillary wall holds water in the circulation — the
basis of how fluids redistribute.
How are infused intravenous fluids distributed among the compartments?
The distribution of an infused fluid follows directly from these principles,
determined by the membranes its constituents can cross,
which is why different fluids are used for different purposes.
An isotonic crystalloid, such as normal saline or a balanced salt solution,
contains sodium that stays in the extracellular fluid,
so the fluid distributes through the whole extracellular compartment,
both plasma and interstitium; only about a quarter to a fifth remains in the
plasma, so relatively large volumes are needed to expand the circulation,
and the rest enters the interstitium.
Five-per-cent dextrose, once the glucose is metabolised, is effectively free water,
which distributes through the total body water,
so very little remains in the plasma — it is poor for resuscitation but corrects
water deficits.
A colloid, containing large molecules retained in the plasma by their oncotic
pressure, stays largely intravascular, expanding the plasma more efficiently.
So an isotonic crystalloid spreads through the extracellular fluid with about a
fifth staying intravascular, dextrose spreads through total body water with almost
none retained, and a colloid stays largely in the plasma — distribution dictating
each fluid's clinical use.
How is the extracellular fluid volume, as distinct from osmolality, regulated?
While osmolality is regulated by water balance,
the volume of the extracellular fluid is regulated by controlling the body's
content of sodium, because sodium, with its accompanying water,
is the principal determinant of extracellular volume.
The body senses its effective circulating volume through baroreceptors and renal
sensors, and adjusts sodium handling accordingly.
A fall in volume activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system:
the kidney releases renin, generating angiotensin two,
which causes vasoconstriction and stimulates aldosterone,
which promotes renal sodium reabsorption,
retaining sodium and water to restore volume;
antidiuretic hormone and reduced renal perfusion also contribute.
A rise in volume releases the natriuretic peptides from the stretched heart,
which promote sodium and water excretion, and suppresses the renin system.
So extracellular volume is regulated by controlling sodium content:
volume depletion activates the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system to retain
sodium and water, while volume expansion releases natriuretic peptides to excrete
them — a system distinct from the water-based regulation of osmolality,
the two together controlling the volume and concentration of the body fluids.
What is the relevance of body fluid physiology to anaesthesia?
Body fluid physiology is fundamental to anaesthesia,
because the management of fluids is a daily and critical task.
Understanding the compartments and the distribution of fluids guides the choice and
volume of intravenous therapy: replacing blood loss or extracellular losses with
the appropriate crystalloid or colloid,
and recognising that dextrose poorly expands the circulation.
Assessment of the patient's volume status — detecting dehydration or overload — and
of disturbances of osmolality and electrolytes, particularly sodium,
guides correction, which must often be cautious to avoid harm such as that from
rapid correction of sodium.
Many perioperative factors disturb fluid balance: fasting, blood loss,
third-space losses, the stress response with its sodium and water retention,
and the effects of anaesthetic agents on vascular tone.
So body fluid physiology underlies anaesthesia through fluid therapy — choosing
fluids by their distribution — the assessment and correction of volume,
osmolality and electrolyte disturbance,
and the understanding of the many perioperative influences on fluid balance,
making it one of the most practically important areas of physiology.
Pull it together: how are the volume and composition of the body fluids kept
constant?
I would draw it together around the principle that the body separately regulates
the volume and the concentration of its fluids,
through distinct sensors and effectors, to keep the internal environment constant.
The total body water is distributed two-thirds intracellularly and one-third
extracellularly, the split set by the impermeant solutes — sodium outside the
cells, protein within the plasma — with water moving freely by osmosis to equalise
osmolality.
Osmolality is regulated by water balance,
through the hypothalamic osmoreceptors driving antidiuretic hormone and thirst.
Extracellular volume is regulated by sodium balance,
through the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and the natriuretic peptides.
The kidney is the principal effector of both.
Disturbances, and their correction by intravenous fluids,
follow these same principles.
So the body keeps its fluids constant by independently regulating osmolality,
via water balance and antidiuretic hormone, and extracellular volume,
via sodium balance and the renin and natriuretic systems,
with the kidney as the common effector — a dual control of concentration and volume
that underlies fluid and electrolyte management in anaesthesia.
Describe the forces governing fluid exchange across the capillary — the Starling
forces.
Fluid exchange between the plasma and the interstitial fluid across the capillary
wall is governed by the balance of opposing pressures, described by Starling.
Two pressures tend to drive fluid out of the capillary,
and two tend to hold or draw it in.
The capillary hydrostatic pressure pushes fluid out,
and is higher at the arterial end than the venous.
The interstitial hydrostatic pressure, normally low or slightly negative,
and the plasma oncotic pressure — exerted by the plasma proteins,
chiefly albumin — oppose this, the oncotic pressure drawing fluid back in.
The net filtration is the filtration coefficient times the difference between the
hydrostatic pressure gradient and the oncotic pressure gradient across the wall.
Classically, this favours slight filtration at the arterial end and reabsorption at
the venous end, with the small net excess returned by the lymphatics.
So fluid exchange across the capillary is set by the Starling forces — the outward
capillary hydrostatic and inward plasma oncotic pressures predominating — net
filtration being the filtration coefficient times the difference between the
hydrostatic and oncotic gradients, with the lymphatics returning the net filtered
fluid — the basis of tissue fluid balance.
How does the revised understanding of the glycocalyx modify the Starling principle?
The classical Starling model, with filtration at the arterial end and reabsorption
at the venous end of every capillary,
has been revised by the recognition of the endothelial glycocalyx.
The glycocalyx is the layer of macromolecules coating the luminal surface of the
endothelium, and it is now understood that the effective oncotic pressure opposing
filtration is that across this layer — between the plasma and the small
protein-poor space just beneath the glycocalyx — rather than across the whole wall
to the interstitial protein.
The consequence is the revised, or no-reabsorption, principle:
in most tissues there is low-level filtration along the whole length of the
capillary, and little or no sustained venous-end reabsorption;
the filtered fluid is returned chiefly by the lymphatics.
This explains why infused fluid is not efficiently reabsorbed back into the
circulation, and the importance of protecting the glycocalyx,
which is damaged in inflammation and sepsis.
So the glycocalyx revises the Starling principle:
the effective oncotic gradient acts across the glycocalyx,
so there is filtration along the capillary with little venous reabsorption,
the fluid returning via the lymph — explaining fluid behaviour in practice and the
significance of glycocalyx damage.
What are the mechanisms of oedema?
Oedema is the accumulation of excess fluid in the interstitial space,
and it follows logically from disturbance of the Starling forces or the lymphatic
drainage, by one or more of four mechanisms.
First, a raised capillary hydrostatic pressure increases filtration — as in venous
obstruction, heart failure, or fluid overload.
Second, a reduced plasma oncotic pressure reduces the inward force — as in
hypoalbuminaemia from liver disease, nephrotic syndrome or malnutrition.
Third, an increased capillary permeability allows protein and fluid to leak into
the interstitium — as in inflammation, sepsis and burns,
with damage to the glycocalyx. Fourth,
lymphatic obstruction prevents the removal of filtered fluid and protein —
lymphoedema.
Often several act together.
So oedema results from a raised capillary hydrostatic pressure,
a reduced plasma oncotic pressure, an increased capillary permeability,
or impaired lymphatic drainage — each disturbing the balance between filtration and
removal of interstitial fluid — a framework that explains the oedema of heart
failure, hypoalbuminaemia, inflammation and lymphatic obstruction,
and guides its management.
Distinguish water depletion from salt depletion.
Dehydration is not a single entity,
and distinguishing the loss of water from the loss of salt and water matters
because they affect different compartments and require different correction.
In pure water depletion — as from reduced intake,
diabetes insipidus or excessive insensible loss — water is lost from all
compartments and the osmolality rises, so the plasma sodium rises;
the loss is shared by the large intracellular compartment,
so the circulation is relatively protected until the deficit is large,
and thirst and antidiuretic hormone are stimulated.
In salt depletion — as from vomiting, diarrhoea, or renal salt loss,
where sodium is lost with water — the loss is chiefly from the extracellular fluid,
because sodium is the extracellular solute,
so the extracellular and circulating volume fall markedly,
producing hypovolaemia and hypotension,
while the osmolality and sodium may be near normal or low.
So pure water depletion raises osmolality and sodium,
is shared across compartments and spares the circulation until severe,
whereas salt depletion contracts the extracellular fluid,
causing hypovolaemia with a normal or low sodium — a distinction determining
whether to give water or salt-containing fluid and how urgently.
Outline the approach to hyponatraemia and the danger of rapid correction.
Hyponatraemia, a low plasma sodium,
is the commonest electrolyte disturbance and usually reflects a relative excess of
water rather than a lack of sodium,
so its assessment turns on the patient's volume status and osmolality.
It may occur with a low, normal or high extracellular volume — for example with
diuretics and salt loss, with the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone,
or with oedematous states — and the cause must be identified to direct treatment,
often by water restriction rather than sodium.
The crucial principle in correction is caution:
the plasma sodium must be raised slowly,
because too rapid a correction of chronic hyponatraemia can cause osmotic
demyelination of the brain, a devastating injury,
as water shifts out of the brain cells that had adapted.
Severe symptomatic hyponatraemia may need careful, controlled correction.
So hyponatraemia is usually a problem of water excess,
assessed by volume status and osmolality and the cause identified to guide
treatment; correction must be slow,
since rapid correction of chronic hyponatraemia risks osmotic demyelination — a
cardinal safety point in fluid and electrolyte management.
Describe the normal daily water balance.
The body maintains water balance by matching intake to loss over the day,
and an appreciation of the normal figures underlies fluid prescription.
On the intake side, an adult takes in roughly two to two and a half litres a day:
most as drink and in food, with a small contribution — around three hundred
millilitres — from the water produced by metabolism, the metabolic water.
On the loss side, the same total is lost by several routes:
the urine accounts for the largest and the regulated portion,
around one to one and a half litres; insensible losses,
from the skin and the respiratory tract,
account for around eight hundred to nine hundred millilitres and are increased by
fever, sweating and hyperventilation; and a small amount is lost in the stool.
Only the renal loss is finely regulated to maintain balance.
So daily water balance matches an intake of about two to two and a half litres —
from drink, food and metabolic water — against equal losses in urine,
the regulated route, in insensible loss from skin and lungs, and in stool;
figures that underlie the estimation of maintenance fluid requirements,
adjusted for abnormal losses.
Describe the composition and effects of the common crystalloid solutions.
The crystalloids differ in composition, and these differences matter clinically.
Normal, or physiological, saline is sodium chloride at a concentration giving a
sodium and a chloride each around one hundred and fifty millimoles per litre,
isotonic but with a chloride well above that of plasma;
large volumes therefore cause a hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis.
The balanced salt solutions, such as Hartmann's or Ringer's lactate and the
acetate-based solutions, have an electrolyte composition closer to that of plasma,
with a lower chloride and a metabolisable anion — lactate or acetate — that is
converted to bicarbonate, so they avoid the chloride load and are more
physiological.
Five-per-cent dextrose provides free water once the glucose is used.
The choice between saline and balanced solutions,
and the avoidance of excess chloride, is a current clinical concern.
So normal saline is isotonic but high in chloride,
causing hyperchloraemic acidosis in large volumes,
whereas the balanced solutions resemble plasma with a lower chloride and a
bicarbonate-yielding anion, and dextrose supplies free water — compositional
differences that determine their effects and their appropriate use.
How is a patient's volume status assessed?
Assessing volume status — whether the patient is depleted,
normal or overloaded — is a constant clinical task,
made by integrating several imperfect indicators rather than any single measure.
The history points to losses or excess.
Clinical examination looks for signs of depletion — thirst, dry mucosae,
reduced skin turgor, tachycardia, hypotension, especially postural,
reduced urine output, and reduced peripheral perfusion — or of overload — raised
venous pressure, oedema and pulmonary crepitations.
Simple measurements help: the urine output, the trend in body weight,
and the fluid balance chart.
More objective and dynamic measures are used in the sicker patient:
the central venous pressure, though a limited guide,
and dynamic indices of fluid responsiveness,
such as the variation in arterial pulse pressure with ventilation or the response
to a passive leg raise or fluid challenge,
which better predict whether giving fluid will help.
So volume status is assessed by integrating the history,
the clinical signs of depletion or overload,
simple measures such as urine output and weight, and, in the sicker patient,
dynamic indices of fluid responsiveness — a synthesis of imperfect indicators that
guides fluid therapy.
Summarise the principles of perioperative fluid management.
I would summarise perioperative fluid management as the application of fluid
physiology to maintain the volume and composition of the body fluids through the
disturbances of surgery.
The aims are to maintain an adequate circulating volume and tissue perfusion,
to replace deficits and ongoing losses,
and to avoid both under- and over-resuscitation, since both harm outcome.
This requires accounting for the maintenance requirement of water and electrolytes,
the pre-existing deficit — for example from fasting or bowel preparation — ongoing
losses such as blood and fluid shifts,
and the redistribution and vasodilatation caused by anaesthesia.
The fluid is chosen by its distribution and composition:
balanced crystalloids for most replacement,
blood products for significant blood loss,
with attention to chloride load and to electrolytes.
Increasingly, fluid is titrated to dynamic measures of responsiveness rather than
given by fixed regimens — goal-directed therapy.
So perioperative fluid management applies fluid physiology to maintain perfusion
while avoiding overload: accounting for maintenance, deficit and losses,
choosing fluids by their distribution and composition,
and titrating to the patient's response — a balance central to good outcome.
Describe the lymphatic system and its role in fluid balance.
The lymphatic system is an essential adjunct to the circulation,
returning to the bloodstream the fluid and protein that filter out of the
capillaries into the interstitium, without which the tissues would swell.
The lymphatic capillaries, blind-ended and highly permeable,
take up interstitial fluid — now called lymph — along with the protein that has
escaped the capillaries and any particulate matter;
the lymph passes through lymph nodes,
where it is filtered and immune surveillance occurs,
and is finally returned to the venous circulation via the thoracic duct.
Flow is driven by the massaging effect of surrounding muscle and vessel pulsation,
aided by valves ensuring one-way flow.
Its importance to fluid balance is shown by the revised Starling principle,
in which the lymphatics return the fluid continuously filtered along the capillary,
and by the oedema — lymphoedema — that follows lymphatic obstruction.
So the lymphatic system returns filtered interstitial fluid and escaped protein to
the circulation via the lymph nodes and thoracic duct, driven by muscle and valves,
and is essential to fluid balance — the route by which net capillary filtration is
returned, its failure causing lymphoedema.
What are third-space losses and the fluid shifts of surgery?
The concept of the third space refers to the sequestration of extracellular fluid
into a compartment where it is functionally lost to the circulation,
neither truly intracellular nor available in the plasma and interstitium,
occurring particularly with surgery, trauma and inflammation.
In major surgery, especially involving the bowel or extensive tissue handling,
fluid accumulates in the traumatised tissues and bowel — from inflammation,
increased capillary permeability and the loss of the glycocalyx — and this
sequestered fluid is unavailable to the circulation,
contributing to an apparent deficit that was traditionally replaced with extra
fluid.
The modern view, however, questions the size and even the existence of a large
third space, attributing much apparent loss instead to over-liberal fluid
administration and to the inflammatory disruption of the glycocalyx,
so that excessive replacement causes harm.
Fluid then returns to the circulation in the recovery phase.
So third-space loss describes the sequestration of extracellular fluid into
traumatised tissue during surgery, classically replaced with extra fluid,
though the modern view regards the effect as smaller than thought and cautions
against the over-administration that this concept once justified — a shift towards
more restrictive, judicious fluid therapy.
Describe potassium homeostasis.
Potassium is the major intracellular cation,
and its homeostasis is vital because the ratio of intracellular to extracellular
potassium sets the resting membrane potential,
so that even small changes in the plasma potassium have profound effects on
excitable tissue, especially the heart.
Total body potassium is overwhelmingly intracellular,
with only a small fraction in the extracellular fluid,
where it is tightly regulated around four to five millimoles per litre.
Two systems regulate it.
Internal balance governs the distribution between cells and the extracellular
fluid: insulin, beta-adrenergic stimulation and alkalosis drive potassium into
cells, while acidosis and cell breakdown release it — mechanisms that buffer the
plasma level rapidly and are exploited in treating hyperkalaemia.
External balance is the matching of excretion to intake,
achieved chiefly by the kidney, where aldosterone promotes potassium excretion.
So potassium homeostasis maintains the tightly regulated low extracellular
concentration, crucial to membrane potential,
through internal balance — the hormonal and acid-base shifts of potassium between
cells and plasma — and external balance — renal excretion regulated by aldosterone;
disturbances being dangerous to the heart and a frequent perioperative concern.
Describe the homeostasis of calcium and magnesium.
Calcium and magnesium are tightly regulated divalent cations with important roles
in excitable tissue and beyond.
Plasma calcium, about half of it ionised and active,
the rest bound to albumin or complexed,
is regulated within narrow limits by three hormones acting on gut, bone and kidney:
parathyroid hormone, released when calcium falls, raises it by mobilising bone,
increasing renal reabsorption, and activating vitamin D,
which increases gut absorption; calcitonin has a minor opposing role.
Calcium is essential for neuromuscular function — hypocalcaemia causing tetany —
for cardiac function, and for coagulation and secretion.
Note that the ionised fraction, not the total, is physiologically important,
and it changes with pH and albumin.
Magnesium, largely intracellular, is regulated mainly by the kidney;
it is a cofactor for many enzymes and influences neuromuscular and cardiac
excitability, deficiency causing arrhythmias and increased excitability.
So plasma calcium, the ionised fraction being active,
is regulated by parathyroid hormone, vitamin D and calcitonin acting on gut,
bone and kidney, and is vital to neuromuscular, cardiac,
coagulation and secretory function; magnesium,
mainly intracellular and renally regulated,
is an enzyme cofactor influencing excitability — both important perioperatively.
Describe the colloids and their effects.
Colloids are intravenous fluids containing large molecules that,
being too large to cross the healthy capillary wall freely,
are retained in the plasma and exert an oncotic pressure,
so that they expand the plasma volume more efficiently and for longer than
crystalloids — in theory requiring smaller volumes.
They are of two broad kinds. The natural colloid is human albumin solution,
the physiological oncotic protein. The synthetic colloids include the gelatins,
and historically the starches and dextrans.
Their advantages of efficient volume expansion are offset by disadvantages and
risks: they are more expensive, they can cause anaphylactoid reactions,
and several — notably the starches — have been shown to cause harm,
including renal injury and coagulopathy,
leading to their withdrawal from much practice.
The supposed advantage over crystalloids has also been undermined by the revised
Starling understanding and by trials showing no clear benefit.
So colloids contain large, retained molecules that expand the plasma efficiently by
their oncotic pressure, comprising albumin and synthetic agents such as gelatins
and starches; but their risks — reactions,
and the renal and coagulation harm of starches — and the lack of demonstrated
benefit over crystalloids have much reduced their use.
Describe the differences in body fluid physiology in the neonate and the elderly.
Body fluid physiology differs at the extremes of age,
with practical consequences for fluid management.
The neonate and infant have a higher total body water as a proportion of body
weight — around seventy to eighty per cent — with a relatively larger extracellular
compartment than the adult; they have a higher metabolic rate and turnover of
water, greater insensible losses relative to size,
and immature kidneys less able to concentrate urine or handle solute and sodium
loads, so they are more vulnerable to both dehydration and overload,
and their fluid requirements per kilogram are higher.
The elderly, by contrast, have a lower total body water,
partly from a greater proportion of fat and reduced muscle,
less physiological reserve, a blunted thirst and a reduced renal capacity to
concentrate urine and conserve sodium and water,
so they too are prone to dehydration and to fluid and electrolyte disturbance,
and tolerate it less well.
So the neonate has a higher, more extracellular body water with high turnover and
immature kidneys, and the elderly a lower body water with reduced reserve,
blunted thirst and reduced renal capacity — both extremes being more vulnerable to
fluid and electrolyte disturbance and requiring careful, age-adjusted management.
Describe the physiology of fluid responsiveness.
Fluid responsiveness is the question of whether giving a fluid bolus will actually
increase the cardiac output, and its physiology rests on the Frank-Starling
relationship of the heart.
A patient is fluid-responsive if both ventricles are operating on the steep,
ascending part of their Starling curves,
so that an increase in venous return and preload produces a worthwhile increase in
stroke volume; if the heart is already on the flat part of the curve,
more fluid will not help and may harm.
Because static measures such as the central venous pressure predict this poorly,
dynamic measures are used, exploiting the heart-lung interaction during
positive-pressure ventilation: the cyclical changes in intrathoracic pressure cause
cyclical changes in venous return and so in stroke volume,
and a large respiratory variation in the stroke volume or pulse pressure indicates
a preload-responsive heart on the steep part of the curve.
A passive leg raise, giving a reversible auto-bolus, tests it directly.
So fluid responsiveness depends on whether the ventricles are on the steep part of
the Frank-Starling curve, predicted not by static pressures but by dynamic measures
— the respiratory variation in stroke volume or pulse pressure,
or the response to a passive leg raise — the physiological basis of goal-directed
fluid therapy.
How does the surgical stress response affect sodium and water handling?
Surgery, like other major stresses, provokes a neuroendocrine stress response that,
among its effects, causes the body to retain sodium and water,
which is important to understanding perioperative fluid balance.
The response includes the activation of the sympathetic nervous system and the
release of a cascade of hormones.
Antidiuretic hormone is released — stimulated not only by any change in osmolality
or volume but also by pain, stress and the surgery itself — promoting renal water
retention and tending to cause a dilutional hyponatraemia if hypotonic fluids are
given.
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is activated, and cortisol is released,
both promoting sodium and water retention.
The net effect is a tendency to retain salt and water for some days after surgery,
with reduced urine output that reflects this physiological response rather than
necessarily hypovolaemia.
So the surgical stress response causes sodium and water retention through the
release of antidiuretic hormone — risking dilutional hyponatraemia — and the
activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system and cortisol;
the resulting oliguria reflects this physiological retention,
a caution against reflexively giving large volumes of fluid in response to a low
postoperative urine output.
Summarise the regulation of the internal environment by the body fluids.
I would draw it together around the body fluids as the medium of the internal
environment, whose constancy — homeostasis — is maintained by the integrated
regulation of their volume and composition.
The total body water is distributed by the impermeant solutes,
water moving freely by osmosis.
Osmolality is regulated by water balance through antidiuretic hormone and thirst;
extracellular volume by sodium balance through the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
and natriuretic systems; and the individual electrolytes — potassium, calcium,
magnesium — each by their own hormonal systems,
with the kidney the principal effector throughout,
and the lungs sharing in acid-base control.
The capillary and lymphatic systems govern the distribution between plasma and
interstitium. These systems are perturbed by disease and by surgery,
with its stress response, losses and fluid therapy.
So the body fluids are the internal environment,
kept constant by the coordinated regulation of water for osmolality,
sodium for volume, and each electrolyte by its own system,
with the kidney as the common effector,
and the capillary-lymphatic balance distributing fluid — an integrated homeostasis
that anaesthesia constantly disturbs and must support.
Thank you. A clear account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Total body water is ~60% of body weight,
two-thirds intracellular and one-third extracellular (the ECF mostly interstitial,
with plasma ~a quarter of it) — the 60-40-20 rule; water is lower in females,
the obese and the elderly and higher in neonates.
Second, Compartment volumes are measured by indicator dilution (volume = quantity
of marker ÷ equilibrated concentration) using markers confined to each compartment;
ECF is sodium/chloride-rich and ICF potassium/organic-phosphate-rich with very low
calcium, differences maintained by the Na/K pump.
Third, Water moves by osmosis to equalise osmolality;
its distribution is set by impermeant solutes — sodium across the cell membrane
sets the ICF/ECF split, plasma protein (oncotic pressure) across the capillary wall
holds water intravascularly; infused isotonic crystalloid spreads through the ECF
(~1/5 stays intravascular), 5% dextrose through total body water (almost none
retained), colloid stays largely in plasma.
Fourth, Osmolality (~290 mosmol/kg) is regulated by water balance — hypothalamic
osmoreceptors driving antidiuretic hormone (renal water reabsorption) and thirst;
extracellular volume is regulated separately by sodium balance — the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system retaining sodium/water and natriuretic
peptides excreting them, with the kidney the common effector.
Fifth, Body fluid physiology underlies anaesthetic fluid therapy:
choosing fluids by their distribution, assessing volume status,
and correcting osmolality/electrolyte (especially sodium) disturbance cautiously —
against the perioperative disturbances of fasting, blood loss, third-space loss,
the stress response and anaesthetic vasodilatation.
Thank you. That concludes the station.